# Final Project
CSCI 297A

## Authors:
- Virginia Weston
- Tina Jin
- Jeff Bradley
- Taylor Tucker

## Data Cleaning
The data we are using comes from the National Center for Education Statistics (https://nces.ed.gov/ipeds/use-the-data). We narrowed down our data search to 
relatively small baccalaureate schools which focus on arts and sciences. We chose most of the features by hand, such as 
admissions rate, number of instructional faculty, etc. We chose our target variable to be the continuous Total Price of 
attendance for an out-of-state student living on campus. 

To clean the data, we first imported it as a Pandas DataFrame. We then went through and looked at the number of NaN values
that occured in the target feature. Since we did not want to impute the values in those 13 examples to keep the soundness 
of our eventual model, we threw out those 13 examples, which was roughly 5.4% of our dataset. 

We then looked at the other features and the prevalence of NaN values. These came up only sporadically and unpredictably,
therefore, we felt comfortable taking the band-aid approach and imputing the values using the median value of the feature. 
Along the way, we dropped extraneous columns that arose from Pandas concatenation and importing the CSV. We also dropped
the "Percent Database" feature, which, while originally could have been interesting to include, was simply a vector of 0s 
for the subset of schools we selected. Therefore, we threw it out to save on computation time and with the knowledge it 
would not have provided us with any information gain as the value was the same for each example.

This left us with a data set with more than 20 features and 225 examples.

## EDA
To do EDA, we started with the basics: scatterplot matrix and the correlation heatmap. These, in and of themselves, 
yielded some very interesting results. We saw some features like "Percent Financial Aid" being incredibly correlated with 
our target: "Total Cost". This information could prove useful for regressors, such as linear regression, in determining 
a simple model to predict a University's cost. Indeed, there were a lot of features that had some sort of relationship
with each other. We believe that, due to this data analysis, we have the opportunity to perhaps even create a simple linear
model which yields a solid prediction. 

We could also look into classification: we would need to simply set a threshold at the median value of the target feature 
to create a binary classification. This could yield results along the lines of "could we predict if the cost of attending
a particular school is greater than the median value for schools like it?" However, I believe determining the actual cost 
of the school would be incredibly interesting.  

Since we do see a lot of relatively correlated features in the heatmap, it might be unwise to use a model such as naïve 
bayes to predict, since many of the features are correlated. However, after feature selection, we might want to evaluate 
more models than we think.


## Feature Scaling
For feature scaling, we decided to use Sci-Kit Learn scaling techniques. As seen in the EDA, the effect of scalers on 
outliers can already be captured by standard and min-max scalers, so we apply these two scalers to the data first. We
will explore L2 regularization when it comes time to work with our models.

## Dimensionality Reduction
We decided to try out  RF feature elimination. For feature selection using random forest, we first applied 
the standard and min-max scalers to normalize and standardize the dataset. Then we used a random tree regressor on the 
data with 80-20 train-test split, and printed out the feature importances obtained by the RF. We ranked the 20 features 
by feature importance, and applied the threshold of 0.01 to the features to get the 8 most relevant ones. The feature
"Average Amount of Aid" has the highest feature importance by far. See the FeatureImportances.png file to see the features
ranked accordingly.

We would also like to try out using PCA to see if there is any validation in terms of which features we select as the most
important. That being said, it might not even be worth it, considering the very clear delineation between the feature 
importances derived by the RF selection method. 

Following the RF method for dimensionality reduction, we believe it would be beneficial to even reduce the feature space 
to include only ["Average Amount of Aid", "Percent Financial Aid", "Percent Awarded", "Total Staff", "Graduation Rate", 
"Percent Admitted", "Number of Bachelor's Degrees"]. We believe this would give us a smaller dimensionality while also 
maintaining high levels of accuracy. We will try both datasets out when we create our models. 

## Figures in 'figs'
Our figures include:
scatterplot_matrix -> visual relationship between features
heatmap -> linear correlations between features
FeatureImportances -> Feature importances generated by scaling_selection.py
OriginalDistributions -> distribution of features
# Scaled Distributions
RobustScalerDistributions
MinMaxScalerDistributions
StandardScalerDistributions
MaxAbsScalerDistributions
